Build process (#31)
U8NWXD/oppia-wiki: Build-process.md

## Table of contents

* [Introduction](#introduction)
* [Build script](#build-script)
* [Build modes](#build-modes)
  * [Build mode constants](#build-mode-constants)
  * [Dev mode](#dev-mode)
  * [Prod mode](#prod-mode)
    * [Plain prod mode](#plain-prod-mode)
    * [Minify only third-party libraries](#minify-only-third-party-libraries)
    * [Maintenance mode](#maintenance-mode)
    * [Deploy mode](#deploy-mode)
    * [Unused: Deparallelized terser mode](#unused-deparallelized-terser-mode)
* [Source maps](#source-maps)

## Introduction

Before we can run the Oppia server, we have to build it. This build process transforms the files defining our application (e.g. code, images, configuration files, etc.) from the developer-friendly format we store in GitHub into a form that can be executed to run the server. If you are running the local development server, this build process makes minimal changes, but when deploying to production, we do much more optimization.

> This page documents how the build process works in each of its modes. For most developers the build steps are handled automatically and can be ignored; however, some bugs appear only in certain build modes. For example, a bug might only happen in prod mode, in which case a developer will be unable to reproduce it in dev mode.

Reviewer: The part of this starting from "however, some bugs appear only in certain build modes" seems unrelated to the part before it. Perhaps you could elaborate a bit more on what you mean by "For most developers the build steps are handled automatically and can be ignored"?

Or, another way to put it is to try and be clear to developers about what they need to do when investigating a bug. How would they know whether the bug appears in dev mode, or prod mode, or both? Should they assume one and, if it's not reproducible there, try the other? etc. -- Some reasoning around the thought process to take would be helpful.

Author: I re-wrote the second paragraph to be clearer and to point to a new section at the end describing how to think about debugging

## Build script

The build process is performed by [`scripts/build.py`](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/blob/develop/scripts/build.py). If you ever want to know exactly how a particular part of the build process works, you should check out the code there.

## Build modes

> There are two primary build modes: dev mode and prod mode. When running in prod mode, you can also enable maintenance mode or deploy mode, or you can choose to only minify third-party libraries. This means the build mode hierarchy looks like this:

Reviewer: Are the three prod mode categories mutually exclusive? It's not clear because the third thing isn't a "mode" and sounds like an add-on, but the structure below suggests that they are mutually exclusive things.

EDIT/UPDATE: I saw the sentence after this list. Maybe we should think of these in terms of flags/options rather than modes? The question of which flags are mutually exclusive (if any) still needs to be explained/described, though. It would also be nice to rename things both here and in the codebase so that we don't use "mode" for things that aren't modes.

Author: I've added a list of all allowed mode combinations to clarify which are mutually exclusive. I agree with renaming the modes, and I've opened #13909 to get @vojtechjelinek's input

* Dev mode
* Prod mode
  * Maintenance mode
  * Deploy mode
  * Minify only third-party libraries

Note that maintenance and deploy mode can be enabled simultaneously.

> We use prod mode for most everything besides local development. For example, we use prod mode when deploying to production and testing servers, and we run most tests in prod mode. A notable exception is the lighthouse accessibility tests, which run in dev mode because they don't depend on prod mode, and dev mode compilation is faster. Note that we also sometimes use prod mode locally when debugging to run a version of the app that's closer to the deployed version.

Reviewer: "which run in dev mode because they don't depend on prod mode" is weird, maybe replace "prod mode" there with "the minifications and optimizations applied in prod mode" or something like that.

Reviewer: It might also be a good idea in general to explain the tradeoff between dev / prod mode (less fidelity to what's running in prod vs. longer compilation time). This can help developers have a framework to reason about what approach is best for their use case.

Author: done

### Build mode constants

> The build mode affects the application during runtimes through the following constants in `assets/constants.ts`:

Reviewer: runtimes --> runtime ?

Author: done

* `DEV_MODE`: Set to `true` if and only if we are in dev mode. Otherwise, this is `false`.

> * `EMULATOR_MODE`: Set to `true` if and only if we are not in deploy mode. Note that being in deploy mode implies being in prod mode. Otherwise, this is `false`.

Reviewer: "Note that being in deploy mode implies being in prod mode." -- Modes are usually mutually exclusive, so this is kind of confusing and we might want to think about a renaming/reframing here. Ditto below.

Author: I agree! Since this will require changes to the build code, I opened #13909 to get input from vojtechjelinek

* `ENABLE_MAINTENANCE_MODE`: Set to `true` if and only if we are in maintenance mode. Note that being in maintenance mode implies being in prod mode. Otherwise, this is `false`.

### Dev mode

> We use dev mode for local development. For example, when you run `python -m scripts.start`, you build the app in dev mode. This mode is optimized to build as quickly as possible, so it doesn't do much optimization.

Reviewer: The last sentence is a bit unclear because "optimize" has two different meanings; perhaps clarify or use different wording.

Author: done

Here's what happens during a dev mode build:

> 1. Some third-party libraries are generated. If you recently ran the server, then there might not be much to change here. Otherwise, the third-party libraries from `manifest.json` are downloaded. Note that the libraries in `manifest.json` are just some of our frontend libraries. The downloaded CSS and JavaScript code files are combined into `third_party/generated/third_party.css` and `third_party/generated/third_party.js`, and the downloaded fonts are placed in `third_party/webfonts/`.

Reviewer: What is the sentence "Note that the libraries in `manifest.json` are just some of our frontend libraries." trying to convey? I feel like I don't get it.

Is it related to the stuff that comes after it?

Author: I'm just trying to make sure I don't give the impression that `manifest.json` is the only place where we specify third-party libraries. I put the sentence in parentheses and added another clause to clarify.

2. The build script sets the constants in `assets/constants.ts` to enable dev mode. Specifically, `DEV_MODE` is `true`, `EMULATOR_MODE` is `true`, and the other constants are `false`.

> 3. [Webpack](https://webpack.js.org/) bundles our frontend code files and runs with a [dev configuration](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/blob/develop/webpack.dev.config.ts) designed for minimal compilation time. Note that the dev mode configuration file inherits from the [root webpack config file](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/blob/develop/webpack.common.config.ts). In dev mode, webpack runs in "watch" mode so that when files are changed, webpack re-builds the app automatically. Note that **this step is not handled by `build.py`.** Instead, this step is usually performed by whatever script you actually executed, for example `start.py`. When running the frontend tests, this step is triggered by configuration in `karma.conf.ts`.

Reviewer: Maybe worth explaining, conceptually, why this step is not handled by build.py. (Or should it be?)

This is so that devs who edit build.py have a conceptual understanding of what's in scope for that file and what isn't.

Author: I think it should be handled by `build.py`, but I've reached out to @vojtechjelinek to check. If they agree, I'll open an issue

Reviewer 2: If we are talking about FE tests then it is because it is required to be inside karma.

For the start.py it is because the webpack is in watch mode and if this was done in build.py we would have to keep the build part running so that we can keep the watch mode.

Author: I've updated the page to explain this

4. The `app_dev.yaml` configuration file for the app already exists, so it doesn't need to be generated.

### Prod mode

In prod mode, we more aggressively optimize the app for performance, but the cost of this optimization is that the build process takes longer. Prod mode is also a little more complicated because it has three additional options: minify only third-party libraries, maintenance mode, and deploy mode.

#### Plain prod mode

First, let's consider what happens in plain prod mode where those three options are all disabled:

1. The third-party libraries are generated like in [dev mode](#dev-mode), but they are also minified so they take up less space.

> 2. Hashes are generated for asset files like images. These will be used later.

Reviewer: Maybe change to `later (see step 5 below)`.

Author: done

python -m scripts.start --prod_env --maintenance_mode
```

#### Deploy mode

Deploy mode is also very similar to [plain prod mode](#plain-prod-mode), except that the `EMULATOR_MODE` constant is set to `false`. Further, we make some changes to the `app.yaml` file:

* Remove the `version: default` line
* Remove the environment variables specified in the `ENV_VARS_TO_REMOVE_FROM_DEPLOYED_APP_YAML` constant in `build.py`. We remove these since they are already present in the production environment.

This mode is used by our deployment scripts.

## Source maps

Even when running in dev mode, the code your browser runs does not look much like the code on your file system. Files have been combined, and in prod mode, they've been minified. To make debugging easier, you can generate source maps that map from the code your browser is running back to the code on your file system.

Generating source maps is expensive, so by default we don't make them. However, you can enable source map generation in both dev and prod modes, usually by passing a `--source_maps`, for example:

```console
python -m scripts.start --source_maps
python -m scripts.run_e2e_tests --prod_env --source_maps
```

> With these flags, the `webpack.*.sourcemap.config.ts` configuration files are used to enable source mapping.

Reviewer: Maybe include some explanation on how to use the source maps once they're generated (or link to a page explaining that)? (This also seems like something that should be covered or linked to on a "debugging tips/guide" page.)

Author: done

Reviewer: > (This also seems like something that should be covered or linked to on a "debugging tips/guide" page.)

Any thoughts on / plans for this bit?

Author: This made me realize that while we have guides for debugging tests, we don't have any guides for debugging the Oppia code directly. This would probably be most useful for debugging the frontend code with the Chrome dev tools. I added #39 to track adding a page for that

## Table of contents

* [Introduction](#introduction)
* [Build script](#build-script)
* [Build modes](#build-modes)
  * [Build mode constants](#build-mode-constants)
  * [Dev mode](#dev-mode)
  * [Prod mode](#prod-mode)
    * [Plain prod mode](#plain-prod-mode)
    * [Minify only third-party libraries](#minify-only-third-party-libraries)
    * [Maintenance mode](#maintenance-mode)
    * [Deploy mode](#deploy-mode)
    * [Unused: Deparallelized terser mode](#unused-deparallelized-terser-mode)
* [Source maps](#source-maps)

## Introduction

Before we can run the Oppia server, we have to build it. This build process transforms the files defining our application (e.g. code, images, configuration files, etc.) from the developer-friendly format we store in GitHub into a form that can be executed to run the server. If you are running the local development server, this build process makes minimal changes, but when deploying to production, we do much more optimization.

> This page documents how the build process works in each of its modes. For most developers the build steps are handled automatically and can be ignored; however, some bugs appear only in some build modes. For example, a bug might only happen in prod mode, in which case a developer will be unable to reproduce it in a local development mode.

Author: ```suggestion
This page documents how the build process works in each of its modes. For most developers the build steps are handled automatically and can be ignored; however, some bugs appear only in certain build modes. For example, a bug might only happen in prod mode, in which case a developer will be unable to reproduce it in dev mode.
```

## Build script

The build process is performed by [`scripts/build.py`](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/blob/develop/scripts/build.py). If you ever want to know exactly how a particular part of the build process works, you should check out the code there.

## Build modes

There are two primary build modes: dev mode and prod mode. When running in prod mode, you can also enable maintenance mode or deploy mode, or you can choose to only minify third-party libraries. This means the build mode hierarchy looks like this:

* Dev mode
* Prod mode
  * Maintenance mode
  * Deploy mode

>   * Minify only third-party libraries

Author: ```suggestion
  * Minify only third-party libraries

```

> We use prod mode for most everything besides local development. We use prod mode when deploying to production and testing servers, and we run most tests in prod mode. A notable exception is the lighthouse accessibility tests, which run in dev mode.

Author: ```suggestion
We use prod mode for most everything besides local development. For example, we use prod mode when deploying to production and testing servers, and we run most tests in prod mode. A notable exception is the lighthouse accessibility tests, which run in dev mode.
```

### Build mode constants

> The build mode is controlled by the following constants in `assets/constants.ts`:

Author: ```suggestion
The build mode affects the application during runtime through the following constants in `assets/constants.ts`:
```

* `DEV_MODE`: Set to `true` if and only if we are in dev mode. Otherwise, this is `false`.
* `EMULATOR_MODE`: Set to `true` if and only if we are not in deploy mode. Note that being in deploy mode implies being in prod mode. Otherwise, this is `false`.
* `ENABLE_MAINTENANCE_MODE`: Set to `true` if and only if we are in maintenance mode. Note that being in maintenance mode implies being in prod mode. Otherwise, this is `false`.

### Dev mode

> We use dev mode for local development. For example, when you run `python -m scripts.start`, you build the app in dev mode. This mode is optimized to build as quickly as possible, so it doesn't do much optimization. This means that the server doesn't run quite as fast.

Author: ```suggestion
We use dev mode for local development. For example, when you run `python -m scripts.start`, you build the app in dev mode. This mode is optimized to build as quickly as possible, so it doesn't do much optimization. This means that the server doesn't run quite as quickly.
```

Here's what happens during a dev mode build:

> 1. Third-party libraries are generated. If you recently ran the server, then there might not be much to change here. Otherwise, the third-party libraries from `manifest.json` are downloaded. The downloaded CSS and JavaScript code files are combined into `third_party/generated/third_party.css` and `third_party/generated/third_party.js`, and the downloaded fonts are placed in `third_party/webfonts/`.

Author: Note that this is only some of the third-party libs and all in the frontend

> 2. The build script sets the constants in `feconf.py` to enable dev mode. Specifically, `DEV_MODE` is `true`, and the other constants are `false`.

Author: ```suggestion
2. The build script sets the constants in `assets/constatns.ts` to enable dev mode. Specifically, `DEV_MODE` is `true`, and the other constants are `false`.
```

> 3. [Webpack](https://webpack.js.org/) bundles our frontend code files and runs with a [configuration](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/blob/develop/webpack.dev.config.ts) designed for minimal compilation time. Note that the dev mode configuration file inherits from the [root webpack config file](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/blob/develop/webpack.common.config.ts). In dev mode, webpack runs in "watch" mode so that when files are changed, webpack re-builds the app automatically. Note that **this step is not handled by `build.py`.** Instead, this step is usually performed by whatever script you actually executed, for example `start.py`. When running the frontend tests without minifying third-party libraries, this step doesn't happen at all.

Author: ```suggestion
3. [Webpack](https://webpack.js.org/) bundles our frontend code files and runs with a [configuration](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/blob/develop/webpack.dev.config.ts) designed for minimal compilation time. Note that the dev mode configuration file inherits from the [root webpack config file](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/blob/develop/webpack.common.config.ts). In dev mode, webpack runs in "watch" mode so that when files are changed, webpack re-builds the app automatically. Note that **this step is not handled by `build.py`.** Instead, this step is usually performed by whatever script you actually executed, for example `start.py`. When running the frontend tests, this step doesn't happen at all.
```

#### Plain prod mode

First, let's consider what happens in plain prod mode where those three options are all disabled:

1. The third-party libraries are generated like in [dev mode](#dev-mode), but they are also minified so they take up less space.
2. Hashes are generated for asset files like images. These will be used later.
3. [Webpack](https://webpack.js.org) runs with watch mode disabled and a configuration optimized for application performance.
4. `app.yaml` is generated from `app_dev.yaml`. The two files are identical in plain prod mode, except for a comment in `app.yaml` noting that it is auto-generated.
5. The third-party libraries, assets, files compiled by webpack, and some other files are all copied to a build folder `build/`. This mimics the build folder we generate and upload to production servers when deploying the app for real. During this process, asset files are renamed to include the hashes we generated earlier. This ensures that if the file content changes, the name changes, so any caches of the old file are invalidated.

> This is the mode our tests run in, and it's what you'll want to use if you want to locally run a version of the app that's as close to the production version as possible. You can use this mode like this:

Author: ```suggestion
This is the mode our tests (except for the lighthouse accessibility tests) run in, and it's what you'll want to use if you want to locally run a version of the app that's as close to the production version as possible. You can use this mode like this:
```

```console
python -m scripts.start --prod_env
```

#### Minify only third-party libraries

In this mode, the third-party libraries are installed and minified, but no other steps from [plain prod mode](#plain-prod-mode) happen. This is only used by the frontend tests.

#### Maintenance mode

> As far as the build process is concerned, maintenance mode works just like [plain prod mode](#plain-prod-mode) except that the `ENABLE_MAINTENANCE_MODE` constant gets set to `true`. Then when the app runs, only admins can log in. We use this when we are upgrading the production server and need to let jobs run without letting users modify any data.

Author: ```suggestion
As far as the build process is concerned, maintenance mode works just like [plain prod mode](#plain-prod-mode) except that the `ENABLE_MAINTENANCE_MODE` constant gets set to `true`. Then when the app runs, only admins can log in. We use this when we are upgrading the production server and need to let jobs run while ensuring users don't change any data.
```

This page documents how the build process works in each of its modes. For most developers the build steps are handled automatically and can be ignored; however, some bugs appear only in certain build modes. For example, a bug might only happen in prod mode, in which case a developer will be unable to reproduce it in dev mode.

## Build script

The build process is performed by [`scripts/build.py`](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/blob/develop/scripts/build.py). If you ever want to know exactly how a particular part of the build process works, you should check out the code there.

## Build modes

There are two primary build modes: dev mode and prod mode. When running in prod mode, you can also enable maintenance mode or deploy mode, or you can choose to only minify third-party libraries. This means the build mode hierarchy looks like this:

* Dev mode
* Prod mode
  * Maintenance mode

>   * Deploy mode

Reviewer 2: Just a note: both maintenance mode and prod mode can be enabled together, we usually expect the maintenance mode be enabled with deploy mode so it might be possible to include the maintenance mode under deploy mode.

Author: I added a note that maintenance and deploy mode can be enabled together, but I think it still makes sense to discuss them separately because maintenance mode can also be enabled locally (e.g. for testing maintenance mode)

  * Minify only third-party libraries

> We use prod mode for most everything besides local development. For example, we use prod mode when deploying to production and testing servers, and we run most tests in prod mode. A notable exception is the lighthouse accessibility tests, which run in dev mode because they don't depend on prod mode, and dev mode compilation is faster.

Reviewer 2: I think we sometimes use prod model for local testing (in order to get "closer" to the deployed version)

Author: done

### Build mode constants

The build mode affects the application during runtimes through the following constants in `assets/constants.ts`:

* `DEV_MODE`: Set to `true` if and only if we are in dev mode. Otherwise, this is `false`.
* `EMULATOR_MODE`: Set to `true` if and only if we are not in deploy mode. Note that being in deploy mode implies being in prod mode. Otherwise, this is `false`.
* `ENABLE_MAINTENANCE_MODE`: Set to `true` if and only if we are in maintenance mode. Note that being in maintenance mode implies being in prod mode. Otherwise, this is `false`.

### Dev mode

> We use dev mode for local development. For example, when you run `python -m scripts.start`, you build the app in dev mode. This mode is optimized to build as quickly as possible, so it doesn't do much optimization. This means that the server doesn't run quite as quickly.

Reviewer 2: I would exclude the last sentence. The speed of dev × prod when ran locally is ± the same, this is because compression is not used locally (compression provides huge perf bonus).

Author: done

Here's what happens during a dev mode build:

1. Some third-party libraries are generated. If you recently ran the server, then there might not be much to change here. Otherwise, the third-party libraries from `manifest.json` are downloaded. Note that the libraries in `manifest.json` are just some of our frontend libraries. The downloaded CSS and JavaScript code files are combined into `third_party/generated/third_party.css` and `third_party/generated/third_party.js`, and the downloaded fonts are placed in `third_party/webfonts/`.

> 2. The build script sets the constants in `assets/constants.ts` to enable dev mode. Specifically, `DEV_MODE` is `true`, and the other constants are `false`.

Reviewer 2: emulator mode is `true` too

Author: done

> 3. [Webpack](https://webpack.js.org/) bundles our frontend code files and runs with a [configuration](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/blob/develop/webpack.dev.config.ts) designed for minimal compilation time. Note that the dev mode configuration file inherits from the [root webpack config file](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/blob/develop/webpack.common.config.ts). In dev mode, webpack runs in "watch" mode so that when files are changed, webpack re-builds the app automatically. Note that **this step is not handled by `build.py`.** Instead, this step is usually performed by whatever script you actually executed, for example `start.py`. When running the frontend tests, this step doesn't happen at all.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. [Webpack](https://webpack.js.org/) bundles our frontend code files and runs with a [dev configuration](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/blob/develop/webpack.dev.config.ts) designed for minimal compilation time. Note that the dev mode configuration file inherits from the [root webpack config file](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/blob/develop/webpack.common.config.ts). In dev mode, webpack runs in "watch" mode so that when files are changed, webpack re-builds the app automatically. Note that **this step is not handled by `build.py`.** Instead, this step is usually performed by whatever script you actually executed, for example `start.py`. When running the frontend tests, this step doesn't happen at all.
```

Reviewer 2: Also frontend test also build webpack but it is done through configuration provided in karma.conf.ts

Author: done

4. The `app_dev.yaml` configuration file for the app already exists, so it doesn't need to be generated.

### Prod mode

In prod mode, we more aggressively optimize the app for performance, but the cost of this optimization is that the build process takes longer. Prod mode is also a little more complicated because it has three additional options: minify only third-party libraries, maintenance mode, and deploy mode.

#### Plain prod mode

First, let's consider what happens in plain prod mode where those three options are all disabled:

1. The third-party libraries are generated like in [dev mode](#dev-mode), but they are also minified so they take up less space.
2. Hashes are generated for asset files like images. These will be used later.

> 3. [Webpack](https://webpack.js.org) runs with watch mode disabled and a configuration optimized for application performance.

Reviewer 2: Maybe link the prod configuration.

#### Maintenance mode

As far as the build process is concerned, maintenance mode works just like [plain prod mode](#plain-prod-mode) except that the `ENABLE_MAINTENANCE_MODE` constant gets set to `true`. Then when the app runs, only admins can log in. We use this when we are upgrading the production server and need to let jobs run while ensuring users don't change any data.

This mode is used by our deployment scripts. You can also enable it locally like this:

```console
python -m scripts.start --prod_env --maintenance_mode
```

#### Deploy mode

Deploy mode is also very similar to [plain prod mode](#plain-prod-mode), except that the `EMULATOR_MODE` constant is set to `false`. Further, we make some changes to the `app.yaml` file:

* Remove the `version: default` line
* Remove the environment variables specified in the `ENV_VARS_TO_REMOVE_FROM_DEPLOYED_APP_YAML` constant in `build.py`. We remove these since they are already present in the production environment.

This mode is used by our deployment scripts.

#### Unused: Deparallelized terser mode

> We used to use a `deparallelize_terser` mode when running the E2E tests on CircleCI, but since we don't run E2E tests on CircleCI anymore, this mode is unused and may be removed soon.

Reviewer 2: Should we even mention it here? I think it will be removed pretty soon.

There are two primary build modes: dev mode and prod mode. When running in prod mode, you can also enable maintenance mode or deploy mode, or you can choose to only minify third-party libraries. This means the build mode hierarchy looks like this:

* Dev mode
* Minify only mode
* Prod mode
  * Maintenance mode
  * Deploy mode

> Note that the maintenance and deploy modes can be enabled simultaneously, so you should really think of them as flags. If you're in prod mode, you can also enable maintenance mode dev mode, both, or neither.

Reviewer: I don't understand the second sentence.

Author: I re-wrote it to try and be clearer

> Dev mode compiles the fastest, but it produces an application that's least like what we run in production. On the other hand, prod mode takes longer to compile but produces an application that is  the closest to what we run in production. Minify only mode is in the middle.

Reviewer: Extra space after "is".

Perhaps, throughout, hyphenate "minify-only" so that "minify" is not read as a verb.

Author: done (both)
